Biodiversity Biodiversity is the variability of life on Earth.
It can be measured on various levels, for example, genetic variability, species diversity, ecosystem diversity and phylogenetic diversity.[1] Diversity is not distributed evenly on Earth—it is greater in the tropics as a result of the warm climate and high primary productivity in the region near the equator.
The Phanerozoic aeon (the last 540 million years) marked a rapid growth in biodiversity via the Cambrian explosion.
In this period, the majority of multicellular phyla first appeared.
The next 400 million years included repeated, massive biodiversity losses.
Those events have been classified as mass extinction events.
In the Carboniferous, rainforest collapse may have led to a great loss of plant and animal life.
Human activities have led to an ongoing biodiversity loss and an accompanying loss of genetic diversity.
This process is often referred to as Holocene extinction, or the sixth mass extinction.
For example, it was estimated in 2007 that up to 30% of all species will be extinct by 2050.[4] Destroying habitats for farming is a key reason why biodiversity is decreasing today.
Biodiversity took the biggest hit in Latin America, plummeting 83 percent.
Since the Stone Age, species loss has accelerated above the average basal rate, driven by human activity.
Estimates of species losses are at a rate 100–10,000 times as fast as is typical in the fossil record.[58] Loss of biodiversity results in the loss of natural capital that supplies ecosystem goods and services.
Species today are being wiped out at a rate 100 to 1,000 times higher than baseline, and the rate of extinctions is increasing.
This process destroys the resilience and adaptability of life on Earth.[59] In 2006, many species were formally classified as rare or endangered or threatened; moreover, scientists have estimated that millions more species are at risk which have not been formally recognized.
Other studies, however, have pointed out that habitat destruction for the expansion of agriculture and the overexploitation of wildlife are the more significant drivers of contemporary biodiversity loss, not climate change.[70] Distribution [edit]Biodiversity is not evenly distributed, rather it varies greatly across the globe as well as within regions and seasons.
Regional biodiversity includes habitats and ecosystems that synergizes and either overlaps or differs on a regional scale.
National biodiversity within a country determines the ability for a country to thrive according to its habitats and ecosystems on a national scale.
Also, within a country, endangered species are initially supported on a national level then internationally.
Ecotourism may be utilized to support the economy and encourages tourists to continue to visit and support species and ecosystems they visit, while they enjoy the available amenities provided.
Nature-based solutions are a critical tool for a global resolution.
Many species are in danger of becoming extinct and need world leaders to be proactive with the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.
About 60 percent of all vascular plants are found in tropical forests.
Mangroves provide breeding grounds and nurseries for numerous species of fish and shellfish and help trap sediments that might otherwise adversely affect seagrass beds and coral reefs, which are habitats for many more marine species.[77] Forests span around 4 billion acres (nearly a third of the Earth's land mass) and are home to approximately 80% of the world's biodiversity.
About 1 billion hectares are covered by primary forests.
Thus localities at lower latitudes have more species than localities at higher latitudes.
This is often referred to as the latitudinal gradient in species diversity.
This hypothesis considers temperature, moisture, and net primary production (NPP) as the main variables of an ecosystem niche and as the axis of the ecological hypervolume.
Colombia is characterized by high biodiversity, with the highest rate of species by area unit worldwide and it has the largest number of endemics (species that are not found naturally anywhere else) of any country.
Selection bias amongst researchers may contribute to biased empirical research for modern estimates of biodiversity.
This period has attracted more attention than others because it resulted in the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, which were represented by many lineages at the end of the Maastrichtian, just before that extinction event.
they might compare russet potatoes with new potatoes or purple potatoes, all different, but all part of the same species, S.
The other category of agricultural diversity is called interspecific diversity and refers to the number and types of different species.
This is a functional classification that we impose and not an intrinsic feature of life or diversity.
The beneficial associated biodiversity include for instance wild pollinators such as wild bees and syrphid flies that pollinate crops[164] and natural enemies and antagonists to pests and pathogens.
For example, wetland ecosystems along coastal communities serve as excellent water filtration systems, storage, and ultimately create a buffer region between the ocean and mainland neighborhoods in order to prevent water reaching these communities under climate change pressures or storm surges.
To sum these up in a relatively short manner, biodiversity helps maintain habitat and animal functions that provide considerable amounts of resources that benefit the economy.[181] Biodiversity's economic resources are worth at around $150 trillion annually which is roughly twice the world's GDP.
The loss of biodiversity is actually harming the GDP of the world by costing an estimated $5 trillion annually.[181] Business supply chains rely heavily on ecosystems remaining relatively maintained and nurtured.
A disruption to these supply chains would negatively impact many businesses that would end up costing them more than what they are gaining.[182] Cultural and aesthetic value [edit]Philosophically it could be argued that biodiversity has intrinsic aesthetic and spiritual value to mankind in and of itself.
This idea can be used as a counterweight to the notion that tropical forests and other ecological realms are only worthy of conservation because of the services they provide.[183] Biodiversity also affords many non-material benefits including spiritual and aesthetic values, knowledge systems and education.[58] Measuring biodiversity [edit]A variety of objective means exist to empirically measure biodiversity.
Each measure relates to a particular use of the data, and is likely to be associated with the variety of genes.
Biodiversity is commonly measured in terms of taxonomic richness of a geographic area over a time interval.
There are many ways to measure biodiversity within a given ecosystem.
Spring's arrival enhances biodiversity as numerous species breed and feed, while winter's onset temporarily reduces it as some insects perish and migrating animals leave.
The term invasive species is applied to species that breach the natural barriers that would normally keep them constrained.
Without barriers, such species occupy new territory, often supplanting native species by occupying their niches, or by using resources that would normally sustain native species.
Extirpation, population decline and homogenization of regional biodiversity are much more common.
Human activities have frequently been the cause of invasive species circumventing their barriers,[198] by introducing them for food and other purposes.
Human activities therefore allow species to migrate to new areas (and thus become invasive) occurred on time scales much shorter than historically have been required for a species to extend its range.
Genetic pollution leads to homogenization or replacement of local genomes as a result of either a numerical and/or fitness advantage of an introduced species.[202] Hybridization and introgression are side-effects of introduction and invasion.
These phenomena can be especially detrimental to rare species that come into contact with more abundant ones.
The abundant species can interbreed with the rare species, swamping its gene pool.
Some degree of gene flow is normal adaptation and not all gene and genotype constellations can be preserved.
As sustainable populations of the remaining native species in an area become assured, "missing" species that are candidates for reintroduction can be identified using databases such as the Encyclopedia of Life and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility.
One approach is to create wildlife corridors that correspond to the animals' movements.
National and other boundaries can complicate corridor creation.[222] Protected areas [edit]Protected areas, including forest reserves and biosphere reserves, serve many functions including for affording protection to wild animals and their habitat.[223] Protected areas have been set up all over the world with the specific aim of protecting and conserving plants and animals.
Some scientists have called on the global community to designate as protected areas of 30 percent of the planet by 2030, and 50 percent by 2050, in order to mitigate biodiversity loss from anthropogenic causes.[224][225] The target of protecting 30% of the area of the planet by the year 2030 (30 by 30) was adopted by almost 200 countries in the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference.
In addition to conserving nature, protected areas are crucial for securing the long-term delivery of ecosystem services.
They provide numerous benefits including the conservation of genetic resources for food and agriculture, the provision of medicine and health benefits, the provision of water, recreation and tourism, and for acting as a buffer against disaster.
These areas are selected by governments or private organizations to protect natural biodiversity along with its underlying ecological structure and supporting environmental processes, and to promote education and recreation.
According to an article published in the National Park Service website, national parks aim their resources at maintaining animal and habitat integrity through conservation and preservation of their ecosystems.
It stated that "the state of nature has deteriorated at an unprecedented and accelerating rate".
It has been used to enable scientists to involve the general public in biodiversity research, thereby enabling the scientists to collect data that they would otherwise not have been able to obtain.[244] Volunteer observers have made significant contributions to on-the-ground knowledge about biodiversity, and recent improvements in technology have helped increase the flow and quality of occurrences from citizen sources.
A 2016 study published in Biological Conservation[245] registers the massive contributions that citizen scientists already make to data mediated by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF).
Despite some limitations of the dataset-level analysis, it is clear that nearly half of all occurrence records shared through the GBIF network come from datasets with significant volunteer contributions.
Biodiverse countries that allow bioprospecting or collection of natural products, expect a share of the benefits rather than allowing the individual or institution that discovers/exploits the resource to capture them privately.
Bioprospecting can become a type of biopiracy when such principles are not respected.[249] Sovereignty principles can rely upon what is better known as Access and Benefit Sharing Agreements (ABAs).[250] The Convention on Biodiversity implies informed consent between the source country and the collector, to establish which resource will be used and for what and to settle on a fair agreement on benefit sharing.
The biodiversity strategy is an essential part of the climate change mitigation strategy of the European Union.
From the 25% of the European budget that will go to fight climate change, large part will go to restore biodiversity[213] and nature based solutions.
- Give €20 billion per year to the issue and make it part of the business practice.
Approximately half of the global GDP depend on nature.
In Europe many parts of the economy that generate trillions of euros per year depend on nature.
It is related to private and public property rights.
It defines species that must be protected because they may be threatened by extinction.
Endangered Species Act is an example of an attempt to address the "law and species" issue.
- Laws regarding gene pools are only about a century old.[257] Domestication and plant breeding methods are not new, but advances in genetic engineering have led to tighter laws covering distribution of genetically modified organisms, gene patents and process patents.[258] Uniform approval for use of biodiversity as a legal standard has not been achieved, however.
Bosselman argues that biodiversity should not be used as a legal standard, claiming that the remaining areas of scientific uncertainty cause unacceptable administrative waste and increase litigation without promoting preservation goals.[259] India passed the Biological Diversity Act in 2002 for the conservation of biological diversity in India.
The Act also provides mechanisms for equitable sharing of benefits from the use of traditional biological resources and knowledge.
Since this time, there have been 16 Conferences of the Parties (COPs) to discuss potential global political responses to biodiversity loss.
Archived from the original on 4 November 2022.
Archived from the original on 18 February 2024.
Archived from the original on 20 October 2022.
Archived from the original on 3 March 2025.
Archived from the original on 15 January 2024.
Archived from the original on 1 April 2023.
Archived from the original on 23 December 2022.
Archived from the original on 17 September 2009.
Archived from the original on 5 March 2026.
See file description page for updated referencing and more complete archives.
Archived from the original on 25 September 2023.
Archived from the original on 27 June 2009.
Archived from the original on 31 August 2024.
Archived from the original on 24 May 2022.
Biodiversity is declining faster than at any time in human history.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
Archived from the original on 14 June 2012.
"More than 75 percent decline over 27 years in total flying insect biomass in protected areas".
Archived from the original on 11 July 2022.
Archived from the original on 10 January 2021.
Archived from the original on 17 July 2023.
Archived from the original on 12 October 2022.
"Are we in the midst of the sixth mass extinction?
Ecosystems and human well-being: current state and trends: findings of the Condition and Trends Working Group of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
Archived from the original on 5 August 2017.
For the first time at a global scale, the report has ranked the causes of damage.
Climate change will likely overtake the other threats in the next decades, the authors note.
The Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services found that in recent decades habitat loss was the leading cause of terrestrial biodiversity loss, while overexploitation (overfishing) was the most important cause of marine losses (IPBES, 2019).
All five direct drivers are important, on land and at sea, and all are made worse by larger and denser human populations.
Through examining the drivers of biodiversity loss in highly biodiverse countries, we show that it is not population driving the loss of habitats, but rather the growth of commodities for export, particularly soybean and oil-palm, primarily for livestock feed or biofuel consumption in higher income economies.
Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services".
Archived from the original on 27 January 2021.
Archived from the original on 22 November 2022.
Archived from the original on 30 January 2023.
Archived from the original on 1 February 2023.
Archived from the original on 13 November 2022.
Alexander von Humboldt Institute for Research on Biological Resources.
Archived from the original on 29 October 2013.
Archived from the original on 14 February 2007.
Archived from the original on 4 May 2016.
Archived from the original on 28 July 2016.
Archived from the original on 8 February 2025.
Archived from the original on 5 July 2025.
"Biodiversity showed positive effects on resistance but mixed effects on resilience to climatic extremes in a long-term grassland experiment".
See also Website of the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity on biodiversity and health Archived 20 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine.
Other relevant resources include Reports of the 1st and 2nd International Conferences on Health and Biodiversity.
Archived from the original on 6 January 2026.
Archived from the original on 25 October 2017.
Archived from the original on 2 July 2019.
Museums and the natural environment: the role of natural history museums in biological conservation.
Archived from the original on 20 September 2013.
Archived from the original on 21 October 2022.
Archived from the original on 30 November 2020.
Forests at the heart of sustainable development: Investing in forests to meet biodiversity and climate goals.
the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services.
"How Do Young Community and Citizen Science Volunteers Support Scientific Research on Biodiversity?
Archived from the original on 21 November 2018.
Archived from the original on 14 April 2025.
Archived from the original on 19 December 2022.
The United States is just one of two countries in the world that are not party to the Convention on Biological Diversity, largely because Republicans, who are typically opposed to joining treaties, have blocked United States membership.
That means the American delegation was required to participate from the sidelines.
Archived from the original on 7 July 2021.
Archived from the original on 26 May 2021.
Archived from the original on 19 September 2012.
Archived from the original on 24 March 2022.