Permaculture Permaculture is an approach to land management and settlement design that adopts arrangements observed in flourishing natural ecosystems.
It includes a set of design principles derived using whole-systems thinking.
Mollison and Holmgren's three foundational ethics and Holmgren's twelve design principles are often cited and restated in permaculture literature.[5] Practices such as companion planting, extensive use of perennial crops, and designs such as the herb spiral have been used extensively by permaculturists.
He proposed the planting of tree fruits and nuts as human and animal food crops that could stabilize watersheds and restore soil health.[10] Smith saw the world as an inter-related whole and suggested mixed systems of trees with understory crops.
Yeomans advanced a definition of permanent agriculture as one that can be sustained indefinitely.
Yeomans introduced both an observation-based approach to land use in Australia in the 1940s and in the 1950s the Keyline design as a way of managing the supply and distribution of water in semi-arid regions.
It addressed the application of permaculture design to growing in major climatic and soil conditions, to the use of renewable energy and natural building methods, and to "invisible structures" of human society.
By the early 1980s, the concept had broadened from agricultural systems towards sustainable human habitats and at the 1st Intl.
Permaculture Convergence, a gathering of graduates of the PDC held in Australia, the curriculum was formalized and its format shortened to two weeks.
After Permaculture One, Mollison further refined and developed the ideas while designing hundreds of properties.
This led to the 1988 publication of his global reference work, Permaculture: A Designers Manual.
Mollison encouraged graduates to become teachers and set up their own institutes and demonstration sites.[19] Critics suggest that this success weakened permaculture's social aspirations of moving away from industrial social forms.
It determines where these elements should be placed so they can provide maximum benefit to the local environment.
The aim is for the whole to become greater than the sum of its parts, minimizing waste, human labour, and energy input, and to and maximize benefits through synergy.[24] Permaculture design is founded in replicating or imitating natural patterns found in ecosystems because these solutions have emerged through evolution over thousands of years and have proven to be effective.
As a result, the implementation of permaculture design will vary widely depending on the region of the Earth it is located in.
Seeking prosperity begins within a local community or culture that can apply the tenets of permaculture to sustain an environment that supports them and vice versa.
This is in contrast, in Mollison's view, to typical modern industrialized societies, where locality and generational knowledge is often overlooked in the pursuit of wealth or other forms of societal leverage.[28] The tragic reality is that very few sustainable systems are designed or applied by those who hold power, and the reason for this is obvious and simple: to let people arrange their own food, energy and shelter is to lose economic and political control over them.
We should cease to look to power structures, hierarchical systems, or governments to help us, and devise ways to help ourselves.
Within a guild each species of insect or plant provides a unique set of diverse services that work in harmony.
Examples of this type of guild include plants that attract a particular beneficial insect or plants that restore nitrogen to the soil.
you want to be established in your garden) with the support of pioneer species (plants that will help the target species succeed).
For example, if the tree layer of your landscape closes its canopy, sun-loving support plants will be shaded out and die.
This guild may include a plant that fixes nitrogen, a plant that hosts insects that are predators to pests, and another plant that attracts pollinators.[32] - Resource partitioning guilds group species based on their abilities to share essential resources with one another through a process of niche differentiation.
An example of this type of guild includes placing a fibrous- or shallow-rooted plant next to a tap-rooted plant so that they draw from different levels of soil nutrients.[32] Zones [edit]Zones intelligently organize design elements in a human environment based on the frequency of human use and plant or animal needs.
Frequently manipulated or harvested elements of the design are located close to the house in zones 1 and 2.
Manipulated elements located further away are used less frequently.
Here permaculture principles aim to reduce energy and water needs harnessing natural resources such as sunlight, to create a harmonious, sustainable environment in which to live and work.
Humans do not intervene in zone 5 apart from observing natural ecosystems and cycles.
Where land and sea meet is a rich area that meets a disproportionate percentage of human and animal needs.
The porous structure of wood acts like a sponge when decomposing underground.
During the rainy season, sufficient buried wood can absorb enough water to sustain crops through the dry season.[37][38][39] This technique is a traditional practice that has been developed over centuries in Europe and has been recently adopted by permaculturalists.[40] The Hügelkultur technique can be implemented through building mounds on the ground as well as in raised garden beds.
logs and sticks) in the bottom of the bed before piling organic soil and compost on top.
A study comparing the water retention capacities of Hügel raised beds to non-Hügel beds determined that Hügel beds are both lower maintenance and more efficient in the long term by requiring less irrigation.[41] Sheet mulching [edit]Mulch is a protective cover placed over soil.
Rainwater collected from the roofs of houses[55] and local institutions can make an important contribution to the availability of drinking water.
It can supplement the water table and increase urban greenery.
Water collected from the ground, sometimes from areas which are specially prepared for this purpose, is called stormwater harvesting.[56] Greywater is wastewater generated from domestic activities such as laundry, dishwashing, and bathing, which can be recycled for uses such as landscape irrigation and constructed wetlands.
It was developed in Australia by farmer and engineer P.
Keyline refers to a contour line extending in both directions from a keypoint.
The practice involves using earthworms, such as red wigglers, to break down green and brown waste.
The worms produce worm castings, which can be used to organically fertilize the garden.
Worms are also introduced to garden beds, helping to aerate the soil and improve water retention.
Worm castings are reportedly more successful than conventional compost for seed starting.[61] Sewage or blackwater contains human or animal waste.
A herb spiral, invented by Mollison, is a round cairn of stones packed with earth at the base and sand higher up; sometimes there is a small pond on the south side (in the northern hemisphere).
The result is a series of microclimate zones, wetter at the base, drier at the top, warmer and sunnier on the south side, cooler and drier to the north.
An example is chickens who can be used to scratch over the soil, thus breaking down the topsoil and using fecal matter as manure.
Factors such as timing and habits are critical.
For example, land is used more ecologically in Jaisalmer, India than in American planned cities such as Los Angeles:[81] the application of universal rules regarding setbacks from roads and property lines systematically creates unused and purposeless space as an integral part of the built landscape, well beyond the classic image of the vacant lot.
Because these spaces are created in accordance with a general pattern, rather than responding to any local need or desire, many if not most are underutilized, unproductive, and generally maintained as ecologically disastrous lawns by unenthusiastic owners.
However, when grazing is modeled after nature, some claim it can have the opposite effect.[103][104] Cell grazing is a system of grazing in which herds or flocks are regularly and systematically moved to fresh range with the intent to maximize forage quality and quantity.
Sepp Holzer and Joel Salatin have shown how grazing can start ecological succession or prepare ground for planting.
The focus is on durability and the use of minimally processed, plentiful, or renewable resources, as well as those that, while recycled or salvaged, produce healthy living environments and maintain indoor air quality.
This attempt failed and was abandoned in 2001.
Australia has never authorized a trademark for the word permaculture.[117] Definition [edit]The broad range of topics discussed in permaculture has led to criticism that permaculture is not clearly defined.
This focus in permaculture on learning from indigenous, tribal and cultures of place is based on the evidence that these cultures have existed in relative balance with their environment, and survived for longer than any of our more recent experiments in civilisation.
Archived from the original on 26 May 2008.
Archived from the original on 21 April 2021.
Archived from the original on 1 November 2011.
Archived from the original on 10 December 2002.
Archived from the original on 5 March 2009.
Archived from the original on 12 March 2013.
All the permaculture farms we visited had large, fully-functioning vermicompost which produced fertilizer that was naturally rich in nutrients and acid that was used as a substance for fumigation instead of synthetic based substances.
"The Magic and Mystery of Constructing a Herb Spiral and Why Every Suburban Lawn Should Have One".
Archived from the original on 17 December 2014.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2012.
Archived from the original on 8 March 2012.
Archived from the original on 20 August 2018.
Sunlight and Seaweed: An Argument for How to Feed, Power and Clean Up the World.
"A Metagenomics Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Dietary Supplementation with Ascophyllum nodosum or Laminaria digitata on Rumen Function in Rusitec Fermenters".
Archived from the original on 15 March 2013.
Archived from the original on 2 February 2014.
Archived from the original on 3 February 2014.
Archived from the original on 12 May 2013.
Archived from the original on 16 March 2017.
Archived from the original on 14 May 2015.